Welcome to this introduction to neural networks. Today we will build an intuition for how these systems actually learn from data.
At the core, a neural network is just a function. It takes an input vector, passes it through layers of weighted connections, and produces an output.
Each connection has a weight, and each neuron applies an activation function. The activation introduces non-linearity, which is what lets the network model complex patterns.
Let's talk about training. Training is the process of adjusting the weights so the network's predictions get closer to the truth. We measure error using a loss function.
The most common approach is gradient descent. We compute the gradient of the loss with respect to each weight, then nudge the weights in the opposite direction of the gradient.
Backpropagation is the algorithm that computes those gradients efficiently. It applies the chain rule from calculus, working backwards from the output layer to the input layer.
A key danger is overfitting. This happens when the network memorizes the training data instead of learning general patterns. It performs well in training but poorly on new data.
To fight overfitting we use regularization. Techniques like dropout, weight decay, and early stopping all encourage the network to stay simple and generalize better.
Finally, remember that data quality matters more than model complexity. A clean, representative dataset will beat a fancy architecture trained on noise almost every time.
That is the big picture. Networks are functions, training is optimization by gradient descent, and generalization is the real goal. Thanks for watching.